---
title: Paava Kadhaigal and the Yayati Complex
date: 2020-12-24
---

![PKYC](/$relToAbs("pkyc.jpg")$)

<!--more-->

I just finished watching Paava Kadhaigal. The last episodes were gut
wrenching. Most of these episodes have their roots in true events. I’ve
heard versions of these throughout my life.

However, the real indictment is not these occasional soul-crushing
stories that we hear, but the fabric of intolerance that a majority of
Indian society has accepted into their way of life. An intolerance for
independence, an intolerance for uniqueness, an intolerance for
originality, an intolerance for diversity. Most societies exhibit this
to some extent. India, and probably most eastern civilizations, take
this intolerance to a disturbingly dark place because of what Devdutt
Pattanaik rightly calls the
[Yayati complex](https://devdutt.com/articles/from-oedipus-to-yayati/).
This intolerance extends to our progeny.

Coupled with the parental mindset of considering children their
property, not a gift given to them, this leads to unspeakable
atrocities, some of which are told in gruesome detail in Paava
Kadhaigal. We are also good as a society to brush the past under the
rug, find a gullible out-group to blame or simply resort to the
convenience of fatalism to explain our unpardonable weaknesses and our
pitiful failure as a society to be inclusive.

I’m hoping that with more creators pushing the boundaries to speak
loudly the shushed truths and platforms giving them a voice, we rise
above the prejudices of our dark pasts, but take all and only the
goodness of our traditions and culture to create a positive, diverse
and inclusive world for the next generations.

I’m thrilled to see the honesty, grit and powerful storytelling coming
from the Tamil Film industry, given the freedom to create. The last
movie that captured me so powerfully was Paruthi Veeran. I know many
will speak out against the series, call for a ban on Netflix. To them, I
say, go read the Mahabaratha - no, not the Mahabaratha made for the
idot-box, but the epic narrations. If Devdutt is too radical for you,
you can read Rajaji’s version in Tamil. That is the most damning “Paava
Kadhaigal” told in the history of Indian civilization.
