---
title: Don't paint over a rainbow
date: 2019-12-21
---

<div class="row gld-12">
 ![Pongal](/$relToAbs("pongal.jpg")$)
</div>

<!--more-->
Pongal and Deepavali were the days we got new clothes. There was a shop
near the railway station that we always got all our clothes from. The
owner gave us a discount for our loyalty and extended a credit when it
was needed.

Every Pongal, after our celebrations, my dad would take two big
cylindrical, stainless steel jars with handle, two "Ever-silver
Thookkus". One filled with Ven-pongal and the other filled with
Chakkara-pongal. He would give it to the shop owner who eagerly awaited
it on that day.

I was 11 or 12.  Fairly reserved.  During the Pongal holidays, an older
kid, maybe 14 or 15, from the neighborhood started playing with me. One
day he told me that he goes early in the morning for exercises. "It is
super fun", he said. "It's not just exercise and yoga, but we also play
kabaddi, go and other outdoor games. Bring your friends".

I roped in a couple of my friends that played street cricket with me. I
went to the huge playground nearby. The exercises were fun, the games
were fantastic. At the end of the week, we had a visitor, he brought in
new games. We played and when we were exhausted, we all sat down in a
circle. Most of us were around the age of 11 or 12, all expecting some
talk about the benefits of exercise.

The talk went on for about 30 minutes. The talk was angry, accusatory
and targeted one group of people. I stopped going the next day.  My
older friend came home in the afternoon and asked me why I didn't show
up. I said I didn't like the talk. He said, anna wants to meet you. I
went with him and met this burly, charismatic guy that I had seen
several times earlier but never spoke to. He and his brother had a
reputation.

He said, "I have high hopes for you, why did you stop?". I said, "I
liked the exercises but I didn't like the talk." "Come, join me for
breakfast, you are too young and don't understand". I said, "I am sorry"
and walked out. 

I was wearing my Pongal shirt that wasn't paid for yet. The older
"friend" never visited me after that.