---
title: Math should sparkle
date: 2019-09-22
---

<div class="row gld-12 teaser-only">
 ![Flower Pot](/$relToAbs("on-math/flower-pot.jpg")$)
</div>

<!--more-->

During the last month, my heart was broken twice when I heard two kids with
incredible appetite for Math say, "I don't like Math". I have heard adults say
that to me and it always made me wonder, "Boy, what kind of monster was their
teacher". To see this happening to kids in real time is torturous. I see that
these teachers are not monsters but in earnest trying to do what they are
"supposed" to do and causing almost irrevocable damage to the kids.

# A true story

New clothes. (Fire)Crackers. Sweets. Crackers. Crisps. Crackers. The festival of
lights was very special to this kid. He would bicycle around and wish strangers
"Happy Deepavali" and they would wish him back. Rain was always around the
corner and it was the deciding authority on the amount of fun most kids had on
any Deepavali day.

![Bijili - Cheap and best](/$relToAbs("on-math/bijili.jpg")$)

The memories. His grandfather, lighting a "Bijili - a small, not very dangerous,
not very loud, not very expensive" cracker and throwing it in the air to see it
burst, against the wishes of his mother. One of those crackers fell into his
brand new shirt pocket and burst to make a nice round black hole in the shirt
and a nice round black burn on his chest.

![Buzz Vanam - The sparkling flower pot](/$relToAbs("on-math/flower-pot.jpg")$)

Or even earlier, not willing to accept that "cracker time" is over, when he took
a couple of "Buzz Vanam - the sparkling flower pot"s into a closed, low ceiling
room, where there were oil lamps to light them up and narrowly avoiding being
blinded for life.

Yeah, Deepavali was special. On that particular Deepavali day, he was a bit down
as all his "bursting" crackers were done. All that remained were "Chattai - the
sparkling string/whip" and the infamous flower pots that were reserved for night
time brilliance. His friends down the street weren't done though, he could hear
"Lakshmi Vedi - a few levels up from the Bijili in terms of noise and cost" or
the "Double Shots - the ones that burst, fly up and burst again".

![Lakshmi Vedi - Better than Bijili](/$relToAbs("on-math/lakshmi-vedi.jpg")$)

He was also disappointed and angry as one of his Lakshmi Vedis turned out to be
a flop, as it was missing the fuse. That was one less bang that his friends
could have heard. Unable to shake off the heaviness, he took the Lakshmi Vedi in
his hand and loitered.

Then it came to him. He ran inside in excitement, picked up the Chattai, cut to
measure and inserted inside the "Lakshmi Vedi" until it touched the very bottom.
He waited in excitement. The sparkling string, unlike the fuse wire was built
for splendor, so it took its own time. After what seemed like an eternity, the
spark traveled inside and finally "Boop" went the Lakshmi Vedi. Not as loud
as the other ones, not as bad as the Bijili either.

![Chattai - The Sparkling String](/$relToAbs("on-math/sparkling-string.jpg")$)

But the loudness didn't matter, his friends were not even in his mind. The idea worked. 

"I saw you do it". 

In all his excitement to pick up the Chattai, he had woken up his dad. "It was a
good idea", his dad said and then went back to sleep.

This was the best Deepavali ever.   

# A fictional short   

![](/$relToAbs("on-math/calculator.png")$)

This is a story I read as a kid in a Tamil magazine. Unfortunately, I don't
remember the author or the title of the story or the magazine I read it from.
Kudos to them - their story survived, influenced and is now being retold.

Ray thought he was smart. He thought he was handsome. But he didn't have to
think, he knew he was in love. The girl? Someone he worked with. He had been
meaning to ask her out or at the very least, make her take notice that he
existed. Time rolled by and it was already six months and he had made no
progress.

It was October, it was the month of Deepavali. He decided that this was his
time. He was going to try every day to get her attention. He overheard her speak
to her friends that she wasn't going home for the celebrations as there was a
death in the family. Maybe, maybe, even ask her to celebrate Deepavali with him.

One week passed and he couldn't muster the courage to even pass by her desk. As
he sat at his desk, defeated, cursing himself for being a coward, he heard a
voice, "Can someone tell me where the calculator is?". It was her. This was his
chance. He jumped up.

"What do you need to do?".

"Oh! I am doing my month end report and I need to tally some large numbers. I am
already a week late and I don't want to make a mistake."

"Just bring it over. I will help you". He said, while he slowly hid the
calculator inside the file folder and closed it.

She brought the report over. He took his paper and pencil and as he put his
fantastic ability for mathematics and the confidence from the accolades he got
from his teachers for his systemic way of working and mental arithmetic to good
use and multiplied large numbers quickly on a worksheet and finished it under 5
minutes while the girl of his dreams, his soul mate, watched over his shoulder.

He got up with a triumphant smile on his face and handed it over to her. He
nervously looked up seeking to see the look of admiration in her face. Her
attention was elsewhere. On his closed file folder.

"Oh, there is the calculator. You know, you could have done it a lot faster if
you had used it", she said.

"Could you please hand it over? I don't want to make mistakes", she looked at
him pitifully and then left.

# What does this all have to do with Mathematics

The above story, while predictable, captures the reality of primary and middle
school mathematics. It focuses on the rote, penalizes mistakes and fails to
reward that which is truly mathematics. Thinking in patterns. Developing an
intuition for the abstractions. Seeing the generic in the specifics. The fuse in
the sparkling string.

Instead of inspiring the children to love the language of Mathematics that helps
us understand everything around us, the curriculum and the educators are
instilling fear, doubt, indifference and dispassion.

## The beautiful mystery of mathematics reduced to misery by two mnemonics

Yes, the [much](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/02/science/math-equation-pedmas-bemdas-bedmas.html)
[talked](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/08/05/science/math-equation-pemdas-bodmas.html)
about in recent times BODMAS and PEMDAS. The curious thing about these mnemonics
are that D and M have the same precedence and so do A and S. The mnemonics even
have a different order. You even need to explain the mnemonic. Instead of it
being a made up mnemonic to avoid mistakes it has become a tool for teaching and
assessments. I wish the mnemonic that history handed over was PTFP - Put the
fricking parentheses.

Laying out unclear rules, making minefields to watch the students trip and say
"Aha, you didn't pay attention in class" is a good way to collect a pay check.
Precedence is an important concept to understand. It is not an important concept
to memorize and get assessed. There are more important topics to cover. There
are more ideas to explore and uncover.

If there are a string of numbers with operators interspersed between and no
parentheses, it was a work of a sloppy human being. We hope that you will never
come across such a human. But if you do, here is a chart that tells you where to
put the parentheses. Or, as Ray's dream girl said, "Use the calculator. Its
faster". That's about all the attention this topic needs. If a 10 year old works
through multiple "problems" on this, spending an hour of their time, a little
kitten in their head that says "math is lovely" dies.

# This is a solved problem

There are [wonderful](https://twitter.com/profkeithdevlin)
[people](https://twitter.com/DrEugeniaCheng)
[talking](https://twitter.com/Mathgarden) [about](https://twitter.com/joboaler)
mathematical education across the world. As a math educator, if you are not
paying attention to this, incorporate these methods into your repertoire, you
are doing a disservice to all your students.

At [Puthir](http://puthir.in), unencumbered by a syllabus or assessments, 
[we have the luxury of taking this much farther](https://www.facebook.com/notes/puthir/how-to-teach-someone-to-fish/381521359148930/).
The most important result we got out of it is kids enjoying Math without any
incentives. Unfortunately, Puthir is not (yet) a school and we can't control
what happens elsewhere.

I wish that all teachers, especially the ones concerning mathematics take an
oath every day, "I shall not do anything to make my students lose their love for
learning". Like the kid on his best Deepavali, students get the most out of
having an opportunity to try things out, see it work and hearing someone tell
them that it was a good idea.
