---
title: Dealing with casual racism
date: 2019-11-18
---

<div class="row gld-12 teaser-only">
 ![muscle man](/$relToAbs("muscle-man-2.jpg")$)
</div>

<!--more-->


<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">People in the US were more careful about their racism in the past. Not sure if that&#39;s true anymore. The casual racism  in the US is unmissable and so hard to confront. <a href="https://t.co/lQbaqbGrGq">https://t.co/lQbaqbGrGq</a></p>&mdash; Navilan (@navilan) <a href="https://twitter.com/navilan/status/1196262875414712320?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">November 18, 2019</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>


The above tweet triggered quite a response in me. During my stay in the US,
casual and extremely rarely the non-casual kind were a constant source of
dissatisfaction in an otherwise comfortable life.

After my return to India, many of the projects that I took on were also from the
US or from the Europe and the casual racism was even more pronounced and
frequent. Part of the reason for starting Puthir was a need to provide
affirmation and confidence to kids that will inhabit this increasingly divisive
but completely connected world.

# Indian men don't have muscles

Is that racist? Isn't it just a fact? Is it alright to say that in front of an
Indian family with a young kid? What was the tone of the comment? What was
context? What was the intention?

The problem with casual racism is any reaction to it will always be labelled as
over-reaction or hyper-sensitivity or can't take a joke. This particular comment
is racist and sexist at the same time (since it was suffixed with, hey look, my
wife has more muscles than Indian men) since the only purpose was to be
derogatory.

## The story of an Indian man

I met with an accident a while back. I was rendered paraplegic and a spinal
fixation was recommended. At some point in time, the surgery I went through was
considered a failure and I was sent back home for recovery. My organization at
that time completely screwed up the corporate insurance, so the financial burden
was on me and my family. Loans from family and friends kept us afloat.

There was this one time, when we needed 10K and my dad went to get it from a
bank in a city (Yeah, no ATMs near our house then). On his way back, he got
mugged and lost the 10K. He came back home inconsolable. I lay in my bed, unable
to move, hearing a grown man wailing outside. The next day he took my mom's
jewelry and went to the city again and brought home the 10K. My dad didn't have
muscles.

I worked hard (remember Kill Bill's tell your mind to tell your leg to tell your
foot to move your toe - I had to do that) and recovered and went back to work
first with two crutches, with one, with a stick and then on my feet with a weird
gait. I paid off my loans and some more. I don't have muscles.

The lack of muscles in Indian men has a rich story behind it. In fact several
stories. Each belonging to a muscleless man.

# Stereotypes without stories

Stereotyping is unavoidable. We all do it. But education and civilization have
brought us to a point where we can control our instincts and apply rationality.
It is important to know the story behind a stereotype. If someone fails to take
that step to know the story they are making a mistake. If they repeat their
behavior, they are racist.

# Avoiding casual racism at work

It is hard to combat casual racism when there is a power imbalance. In order to
avoid this, leadership needs to be strong and vocal and call out inappropriate
behavior when it happens. Perhaps all that is needed is a talk, a swapping of
stories. Perhaps sometimes, something stronger.

A wake up call.
