---
title: Troubles in monkey land
date: 2019-09-18
---

<div class="row gld-12 teaser-only">
 ![Stick](/$relToAbs("troubles-in-monkey-land/art1.jpg")$)
</div>

<!--more-->

![Monkey Land - Illustration by Sowmya](/$relToAbs("troubles-in-monkey-land/art1.jpg")$)

Once upon a time there were a bunch of monkey-natured monkeys living in mango
land. They ate, well, mangoes. They loved their mangoes. They were tasty, juicy
and immensely satisfying. They ate the fruits, threw the seeds away and more
mango trees grew. They were a happy bunch of monkeys.

Close to the mango land, there lived another bunch of monkey-natured monkeys.
Their place was called mosambi land. Unsurprisingly, they ate mosambis. They
loved their mosambis, ate them, spit the seeds and more mosambi trees grew. It
was a larger forest. So, there were more monkeys in the mosambi land than the
mango land.

Life was peaceful, monkeys from the mango land sometimes visited the mosambi
land and monkeys from the mosambi land visited the mango land. During these
visits, the monkeys gifted each other the fruit of their land. As a result a few
mango trees grew in mosambi land and a few mosambi trees grew in mango land.

Peace was not lasting though. Change came in the form of a large army of
monkey-natured monkeys that ate oranges. They attacked and took control of most
of mosambi land. The mosambi monkeys had to get used to eating oranges because
that was the fruit of their captors. Eventually, they started growing kinnows
which were a mix of oranges and mosambis. Over time, the orange monkeys lost
their power and some of them got integrated with the mosambi monkeys. They all
lived together happily now calling themselves kinnow monkeys.


The mango monkeys were lucky because there was a river between them and the
mosambi land and it was difficult for the attackers. Eventually though, a larger
and stronger army of monkey-natured monkeys came in hordes and captured both
kinnow land and mango land. Their fruit was apple. Both the kinnow monkeys and
the mango monkeys had to get used to eating apples.

![Monkey Land - Illustration by Sowmya](/$relToAbs("troubles-in-monkey-land/art2.jpg")$)

After a long time, the apple monkeys went back to their place because their land
was getting attacked and they were also attacked by the mango and kinnow monkeys
here. Finally, it was back to peace time in kinnow land and mango land. The
kinnow monkeys and the mango monkeys decided, "Let's form a united front so that
the apple monkeys never attack us." So they formed an alliance and peace lasted
even longer. All along, the monkeys were respectful and enjoyed each other's
fruits whenever they visited across the river.

Lasting peace always brought restlessness and the kinnow monkeys started
insisting that the mango monkeys also cultivate kinnows and eat them so that
they can become one and have lasting protection. They could all be kinnow land.
The mango monkeys felt disrespected by this suggestion. They said, "It doesn't
matter what fruit we eat, we can always present a united front. It has worked so
far and there is no need to doubt that. We all love mangoes. Those of us that
like kinnows shall eat them. No one can shove a kinnow down our throat though."
Kinnow monkeys, drunk on the power of numbers, began insisting that it should
be kinnow land - it is only fair because there are more kinnow monkeys than
mango monkeys.

As the quarrel continued, the monkey-natured litchi monkeys watched with
pleasure, prepping their armies, waiting for the right time to exert their
dominance.

**Author's note:** All these monkeys are fictional characters. I have not
personally met any of them. If I ever meet the kinnow monkeys that are imposing
kinnows though, I will tell them that they are complete idiots. They do not
understand fruit, monkeys or the history of monkey land.

